Passiflora edulis
www.valdunia.lt
Passiflora edulis, commonly known as passion fruit, is a vine species of passion flower native to the region of southern Brazil through Paraguay to northern Argentina. It is cultivated commercially in tropical and subtropical areas for its sweet, seedy fruit.
The fruit is a pepo, a type of berry, round to oval, either yellow or dark purple at maturity, with a soft to firm, juicy interior filled with numerous seeds. The fruit is both eaten and juiced, with the juice often added to other fruit juices to enhance aroma.
Etymology
The passion fruit is so called because it is one of the many species of passion flower, the English translation of the Latin genus name, Passiflora. Around 1700, the name was given by missionaries in Brazil as an educational aid while trying to convert the indigenous inhabitants to Christianity; its name was flor das cinco chagas or "flower of the five wounds" to illustrate the crucifixion of Christ, with other plant components also named after an emblem in the Passion of Jesus. 
Description
Passiflora edulis is a perennial vine; tendrils are borne in leaf axils, and have a red or purple hue when young. There are two main varieties: a purple-fruited type, P. edulis f. edulis, and the yellow-fruited P. edulis f. flavicarpa. 
Usually the vine produces a single flower 5–7.5 cm wide at each node. The flower has 5 oblong, green sepals and 5 white petals. The sepals and petals are 4-6mm in length and form a fringe. The base of the flower is a rich purple with 5 stamens, an ovary, and a branched style. The styles bend backward and the stigmas, which are located on top of the styles, have a very distinct head. 
The fruit produced is entirely fleshy (making it botanically a berry), and is spherical to ovoid. The outside color of the berry ranges from dark-purple with fine white specks to light yellow. The fruit is 4–7.5 cm in diameter; purple fruits are smaller, weighing around 35 grams, while yellow fruits are closer to 80 grams. The smooth, leathery rind is 9–13 mm thick, including a thick layer of pith. Within the berry, there are typically 250 brown seeds, each 2.4 mm in length. Each seed is surrounded by a membranous sac filled with pulpy juice. The flavor of the juice is slightly acidic and musky. The passion fruit's flavor can be compared to the guava fruit. 
Varieties
Yellow and purple passion fruit variety (P. edulis var. flavicarpa) comparison
Several distinct varieties of passion fruit with clearly differing exterior  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.health.com%2F passion-fruit-benefits-8426147&psig=AOvVaw14wYPJAhZ1fdQPe7EfajJj&ust=1717197589072000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBIQjRxqFwoTCOC02tPBtoYDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAE appearances exist. The bright yellow flavicarpa variety, also known as yellow or golden passion fruit, can grow up to the size of a grapefruit, has a smooth, glossy, light and airy rind, and has been used as a rootstock for purple passion fruit in Australia.  The dark purple edulis variety is smaller than a lemon, though it is less acidic than yellow passion fruit, and has a richer aroma and flavour.
Uses
Passion fruit has a variety of uses related to its favored taste as whole fruit and juice. 
In Australia and New Zealand, it is available commercially both fresh and tinned. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Passiflora_edulis_forma_flavicarpa.jpg It is added to fruit salads, and fresh fruit pulp or passion fruit sauce is commonly used in desserts, including as a topping for pavlova (a regional meringue cake) and ice cream, a flavouring for cheesecake, and in the icing of vanilla slices. A passion-fruit–flavored soft drink called Passiona has also been manufactured in Australia since the 1920s. It can be used in some alcoholic cocktails.
In Brazil, the term maracujá applies to passion fruit (maracujá azedo, or "sour") and granadillo (maracujá doce, or "sweet"). Passion fruit mousse is a common dessert, and passion fruit pulp is used to decorate the tops of cakes. Passion fruit juice, ice pops, and soft drinks are also consumed. When making a caipirinha, passion fruit may be used instead of lime.
In Cambodia the red and yellow passion fruit grown in the Mondulkiri Province are used to produce wine and liquor. 
In Colombia and Costa Rica, it is used for juices and desserts.
In the Dominican Republic, where it is locally called chinola, it is used to make juice and fruit preserves. Passion fruit-flavored syrup is used on shaved ice, and the fruit is also eaten raw, sprinkled with sugar.
In East Africa, passion fruit is used to make juice, and is commonly eaten as a whole fruit. 
In Hawaii, where it is known as lilikoʻi, fresh passion fruit pulp is eaten. Lilikoi-flavored syrup is used as a topping for shave ice, soft drinks, a glaze, and to marinate meat and vegetables. It is used as a flavoring for malasadas, cheesecakes, cookies, dessert bars, ice cream and mochi. Passion fruit is also used in jam or jelly, as well as a fruit curd known as "lilikoi butter".
In India, the government of Andhra Pradesh started growing passion fruit vines in the Chintapalli (Vizag) forests to make fruit available within the region. The fruit is eaten raw, sprinkled with sugar, and is used to make juice https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Passiflora_edulis_forma_flavicarpa.jpg.
In Indonesia, where it is known as markisa, both edulis and flavicarpa varieties are cultivated and consumed differently. The former is normally eaten as is, while the latter is more commonly strained to obtain its juice, which is cooked with sugar to make passion fruit syrup used in drinks and desserts. 
In Mexico, passion fruit is used to make juice or is eaten raw with chili powder and lime https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2F www.jctropicals.us%2Fblog%2Fproducts%2Fpassion-fruit%2F&psig=AOvVaw14wYPJAhZ1fdQPe7EfajJj&ust=1717197589072000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBIQjRxqFwoTCOC02tPBtoYDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAJ.
In Paraguay, passion fruit is used principally for its juice, to prepare desserts such as passion fruit mousse, cheesecake, ice cream, and to flavor yogurts and cocktails.
In Peru, passion fruit has long been a staple in homemade ice pops called "marciano" or "chupetes". Passion fruit is also used in several desserts, especially mousses and cheesecakes. Passion fruit juice is also drunk on its own and is used in ceviche variations and in cocktails, including the Maracuyá sour, a variation of the Pisco sour. Granadilla, or "sweet" can be eaten raw.
In the Philippines, passion fruit is commonly sold in public markets and in public schools. Some vendors sell the fruit with a straw to enable sucking out the seeds and juices inside.
In Portugal, especially the Azores and Madeira, passion fruit https://youtu.be/r8kKiKhO9Js?si=AaRremB3e98A7QL2 is used as a base for a variety of liqueurs and mousses.
In Puerto Rico, where the fruit is known as "parcha", it is used in juices, ice cream or pastries.
In South Africa, passion fruit, known locally as Granadilla (the yellow variety as Guavadilla), is used to flavor yogurt, soft drinks, such as Schweppes' "Sparkling Granadilla", and numerous cordial drinks (in cordial flavors it is referred to as passion fruit). It is often eaten raw or used as a topping for cakes and tarts. Granadilla juice is commonly available in restaurants. The yellow variety is used for juice processing, while the purple variety is sold in fresh-fruit markets.
In Sri Lanka, passion fruit juice, along with faluda, is a common refreshment. Passion fruit cordial is manufactured both at home as well as industrially by mixing the pulp with sugar.
In Suriname, where it is known as markoesa, there are three varieties. The red and orange variety are sold by markets and eaten as a fruit because of their natural sweet flavor. The sour yellow variety, widely grown in the coastal region, is used to make jam and juices with added sugar, either uncooked for instant use or cooked into a thick syrup for storage in the fridge. The juice is also used to flavor cocktails.

